>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 12: NORTH
KOREA TEST FIRES A BALLISTIC
MISSILE IN DEFIANCE OF THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.
THE TRUMP WHITE HOUSE MULLS ITS
OPTIONS OVER THE IMMIGRATION BAN
BLOCKED BY THE COURTS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
MULTIPLE GENERATIONS OF
NEIGHBORS LIVING TOGETHER, BY
DESIGN.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S VOW TO GET
TOUGH ON NORTH KOREA IS BEING
TESTED BY TODAY'S FIRST MISSILE
TEST BY NORTH KOREA SINCE MR.
TRUMP TOOK OFFICE.
THIS MORNING, NORTH KOREA FIRED
AN INTERMEDIATE RANGE MISSILE
THAT FLEW 300 MILES EAST OVER
THE KOREAN PENINSULA AND LANDED
IN THE SEA OF JAPAN, ACCORDING
TO SOUTH KOREAN AND U.S.
OFFICIALS.
THE PENTAGON SAYS THE MISSILE
POSED NO THREAT TO NORTH
AMERICA, AND REUTERS QUOTED AN
ANONYMOUS U.S. OFFICIAL AS
SAYING: "THIS WAS NO SURPRISE."
STILL, NATO-- THE U.S.-LED
MILITARY ALLIANCE WITH EUROPE--
CONDEMNED THE TEST, WHILE SOUTH
KOREA AND FRANCE SAID IT
VIOLATED UNITED NATIONS
RESOLUTIONS BARRING NORTH KOREA
FROM DEVELOPING OR TESTING
BALLISTIC MISSILES AND NUCLEAR
WEAPONS.
RESPONDING TO THE TEST,
PRESIDENT TRUMP BRIEFLY
ADDRESSED REPORTERS LAST NIGHT
AT HIS HOME IN PALM BEACH,
FLORIDA, ALONG WITH HIS WEEKEND
GUEST, JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER
SHINZO ABE.
>> I JUST WANT EVERYBODY TO
UNDERSTAND AND FULLY KNOW THAT
THE UNITED STATES STANDS BEHIND
JAPAN, IT'S GREAT ALLY, 100%.
>> NORTH KOREA'S MOST RECENT
MISSILE LAUNCH IS ABSOLUTELY
INTOLERABLE.
NORTH KOREA MUST FULLY COMPLY
WITH THE RELEVANT UN SECURITY
COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: ON FRIDAY, IN A
JOINT NEWS CONFERENCE WITH PRIME
MINISTER ABE, THE PRESIDENT SAID
CURBING NORTH KOREA'S NUCLEAR
WEAPONS PROGRAM WAS AS:
"VERY, VERY HIGH PRIORITY."
TODAY, SENIOR WHITE HOUSE
ADVISER STEPHEN MILLER SAID
AMERICAN SECURITY PARTNERS IN
ASIA ARE CRITICAL.
>> THE MESSAGE IS THAT WE ARE
GOING TO REINFORCE AND
STRENGTHEN OUR VITAL ALLIANCES
IN THE PACIFIC REGION AS PART OF
OUR STRATEGY TO DETER AND
PREVENT THE INCREASING HOSTILITY
THAT WE'VE SEEN IN RECENT YEARS
FROM THE NORTH KOREAN REGIME.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SENATE'S
DEMOCRATIC MINORITY LEADER SAID
TODAY-- THE U.S. SHOULD CALL ON
CHINA TO KEEP NORTH KOREA IN
LINE.
ECONOMICALLY-- 90% OF IMPORTS
AND EXPORTS GO THROUGH CHINA,
AND I THINK WE HAVE TO TELL THE
CHINESE THAT THEY HAVE TO PUT
THE WOOD TO NORTH KOREA IN A
MUCH MORE SERIOUS WAY THAN
THEY'VE DONE SO FAR.
>> Sreenivasan: TO DISCUSS THE
IMPLICATIONS OF NORTH KOREA'S
LATEST MISSILE TEST, I'M JOINED
FROM WASHINGTON BY JOHN
WOLFSTHALL, A FELLOW AT HARVARD
UNIVERSITY AND A FORMER SPECIAL
ASSISTANT TO PRESIDENT OBAMA.
SO, FIRST, HOW SIGNIFICANT WAS
THIS TEST, THIS PROVOCATION?
>> I DON'T VIEW THIS ONE TEST AS
A MAJOR CHANGE IN NORTH KOREA'S
CAPABILITIES.
THIS IS PART OF A SERIES OF
TESTS THAT NORTH KOREA'S BEEN
PURSUING FOR MANY YEARS.
WHAT THEY'RE SEEKING TO DO IS
DEVELOP A RELIABLE RANGE OF
MISSILE DELIVERY SYSTEMS THAT
CAN CAN DELIVER NUCLEAR WEAPONS
ALL OVER THE REGION, AND
EVENTUALLY TO THE UNITED STATES.
THAT TAKES A LOT OF TESTS.
SO I DON'T THINK THIS ONE TEST
IS A MAJOR ELEVATION OF THEIR
CAPABILITY.
BUT IT'S ANOTHER STEP IN THE
WRONG DIRECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S THE
WORLD TO DO HERE?
I MEAN, I JUST RETWEETED A NOTE
FROM THE NATO SECRETARY-GENERAL.
HE SAYS:
BESIDES STRONG CONDEMNATION WHAT
CAN THE WORLD DO?
>> WELL, THE GOOD NEWS IS WE
HAVE LOTS OF OPTIONS.
THE BAD NEWS IS THEY'RE ALL
REALLY POOR OPTIONS.
WE CAN EITHER SQUEEZE AND
PRESSURE NORTH KOREA, TRY TO
TIGHTEN SANCTIONS BY WORKING
WITH CHINA AND THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY, IN THE HOPES THAT
THEY'LL GIVE UP THEIR PROGRAMS
OR NEGOTIATE THEM AWAY.
OR WE CAN PREPARE OURSELVES
MILITARILY TO SHOOT DOWN
MISSILES, WHICH IS AN IMPERFECT
SCIENCE, AT BEST, AND TO DEFEND
AND PROTECT OUR ALLIES.
I THINK WHAT WE'LL END UP DOING
IS PROBABLY A COMBINATION OF
BOTH.
WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT SOUTH
CORIA AND JAPAN ARE WITH US.
WE NEED TO KEEP CHINA ON POINT
AND PRESSURING NORTH KOREA TO
STOP THESE DANGEROUS ACTIONS,
AND WE NEED TO PREPARE OURSELVES
MILITARILY IN THE INEVITABLE
CASE THAT NORTH KOREA IS JUST
GOING TO KEEP MARCHING FORWARD.
>> Sreenivasan: PRIME MINISTER
ABE AND PRESIDENT TRUMP MADE A
PHOTO-OP YESTERDAY EVENING WHERE
THEY SOLIDIFIED THEIR ALLEGIANCE
TO ONE ANOTHER, THAT THE UNITED
STATES STANDS WITH JAPAN.
SOUTH KOREA, RIGHT ON THE
BORDER, HAS A LOT MORE TO LOSE.
WE HAVEN'T HEARD MUCH ON OUR
ALLIANCE, OR AT LEAST OUR
INTEREST TO SUPPORT THE SOUTH
RIGHT NOW.
>> THAT'S TRUE.
AND I THINK THAT WAS AN
OVERSIGHT BY THE PRESIDENT.
I DON'T THINK IT WAS
INTENTIONAL.
OUR SECRETARY OF DEFENSE,
MATTIS, WAS JUST IN SOUTH KOREA
AND MADE CLEAR THAT WE WILL
DEFEND SOUTH KOREA WITH
EVERYTHING WE HAVE, IF
NECESSARY.
SO I THINK GENERALLY SPEAK THE
ALLIANCE IS RELATIVELY STRONG.
BUT THIS IS PART OF THE LEARNING
CURVE THAT EVERY NEW PRESIDENT
HAS.
YOU NEED TO MAKE SURE YOU'RE
INCLUSIVE OF ALL OF OUR ALLIES,
THAT YOU DON'T LEAVE ANY GAPS SO
THAT IS THAT THERE'S NO ROOM FOR
NORTH KOREA TO TRY TO SEPARATE
THE UNITED STATES FROM ITS
SECURITY INTERESTS IN THE
REGION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHY ARE WE
HERE OR AT THIS POINT?
CONSIDERING THAT YOU WERE AT THE
OBAMA WHITE HOUSE, AND YOU
WORKED ON THESE ISSUES.
WHAT WAS THE STUMBLING BLOCK?
WHY COULDN'T WE GET NORTH KOREA
TO AT LEAST ROLL BACK TOWARDS
DISARMAMENT?
>> WELL, I THINK THERE ARE A
NUMBER OF CHALLENGES.
THIS IS AN ISSUE THAT'S BEEN
PERPLEXING ADMINISTRATIONS SINCE
THE LATE 1980s.
I SPENT TIME IN NORTH KOREA IN
THE 1990s, WHEN THEIR NUCLEAR
PROGRAM WAS FROZEN UNDER
PRESIDENT CLINTON.
THE MAJOR CHALLENGE IS RIGHT NOW
CHINA VIEWS A COLLAPSE OF NORTH
KOREA AS A GREATER THREAT THAN
THEY DO A NUCLEAR NORTH KOREA.
AND UNTIL THAT CALCULATION
CHANGES, CHINA IS NEVER GOING TO
PUT THE TYPE OF PRESSURE ON
NORTH KOREA NEEDED TO GINS THEM
TO GIVE UP THEIR NEARLY MISSILE
CAPABILITIES.
AND RIGHT NOW, KIM JONG-UN, THE
RELATIVELY UNTESTED LEADER OF
NORTH KOREA, VIEWS THEM AS THE
ACCEPT THOR OF POWER, THAT IF HE
GIVES THOSE UP, HIS CHANCES OF
SURVIVAL ARE EXTREMELY LIMITED
SO HE'S GOING TO HOLD ON TO THEM
AS TIGHTLY AS HE CAN.
>> Sreenivasan: WOULD THEY
ACTUALLY RESPOND OR WOULD THEY
FEEL THE IMPACT OF, SAY, GREATER
SANCTIONS, PLACED ON THEM BY THE
WORLD COMMUNITY?
>> WELL, I THINK THEY ALREADY
ARE FEELING TIGHT SANCTIONS
UNDER THE PREVIOUS
ADMINISTRATION WHERE I WORKED.
WE WERE ABLE TO SEVERELY
CONSTRAIN FINANCIAL FLOWS, THE
FLOW OF COAL INTO NORTH KOREA,
WHICH IS A NEEDED COMMODITY.
SO I THINK THERE IS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO REALLY CONTRADICT
CONSTRICT THE ECONOMIC FLOW
INTO THE NORTH.
BUT AS I SAID, THE PROBLEM IS
UNTIL CHINA BELIEVES THAT A
COLLAPSE OF NORTH KOREA IS IN
ITS INTEREST, THEY'RE NOT GOING
TO SQUEEZE THEM TIGHTLY ENOUGH.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, JON
WOLFSTHAL, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION SAYS
IT'S WEIGHING ALL OPTIONS TO
REINSTATE OR AMEND ITS EXECUTIVE
ORDER BANNING IMMIGRATION BY
CITIZENS FROM SEVEN
PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM COUNTRIES:
IRAN, IRAQ, LIBYA, SYRIA,
SOMALIA, SUDAN, AND YEMEN.
THAT INCLUDES POSSIBLY APPEALING
LAST WEEK'S APPEALS COURT
DECISION THAT UPHELD A FEDERAL
JUDGE'S TEMPORARY RESTRAINING
ORDER OF THE BAN NATIONWIDE OR
ISSUING A REWRITE OF THE ORDER.
WHITE HOUSE SENIOR ADVISER
STEPHEN MILLER, WHO HELPED DRAFT
THE ORIGINAL ORDER, SAID TODAY:
NO IMMIGRANT HAS A
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO ENTER
THE UNITED STATES.
>> THIS IS NOT A DECISION BASED
UPON NATIONAL ORIGINS.
IT'S A DECISION BASED UPON
SECURITY CONDITIONS IN THOSE
COUNTRIES.
SYRIA IS A DISASTER ZONE.
LIBYA IS IN RUINS.
YEMEN HAS A MASSIVE RESURGENT
TERRORISM MOVEMENT.
THESE ARE DECISIONS BASED UPON
THE ABILITY OF THOSE COUNTRIES
TO COOPERATE WITH OUR
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL FOR WASHINGTON STATE--
BOB FERGUSON-- WHO SUCCESSFULLY
ARGUED FOR BLOCKING THE BAN,
SAYS IF THE CASE GOES TO TRIAL
ON THE MERITS OF THE POLICY,
HE'LL TRY TO FORCE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS TO
TESTIFY.
>> THAT MEANS WE CAN SEEK
DEPOSITIONS FROM ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIALS.
WE CAN ASK FOR DOCUMENTS AND
EMAILS TO GET BEHIND WHAT TRULY
MOTIVATED THAT EXECUTIVE ORDER.
I ABSOLUTELY INTEND TO USE THOSE
TOOLS TO CONTINUE WITH THIS
CASE.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT TRUMP
ADDRESSED THE NATIONWIDE SURGE
IN IMMIGRATION ARRESTS IN THE
PAST WEEK, TWEETING THIS
MORNING:
>> THE CRACKDOWN ON ILLEGAL
CRIMINALS IS MERELY THE KEEPING
OF MY CAMPAIGN PROMISE.
GANG MEMBERS, DRUG DEALERS AND
OTHERS ARE BEING REMOVED!
>> Sreenivasan: PURSUANT TO HIS
EXECUTIVE ORDER CALLING FOR
EXPEDITED DEPORTATIONS, THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
ARRESTED HUNDREDS OF IMMIGRANTS,
IN WHAT THE AGENCY SAYS WERE
TARGETED ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONS
AGAINST CRIMINALS AND
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS FROM A
DOZEN LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES.
>> Sreenivasan: A TEXAS WOMAN
WAS SENTENCED TO EIGHT YEARS IN
PRISON FOR VOTING ILLEGALLY.
FOR MORE ON THE CASE WATCH MY
INTERVIEW WITH ASSOCIATED PRESS
REPORTER PAUL WEBER AT
www.facebook.com/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: CANADIAN PRIME
MINISTER JUSTIN TRUDEAU WILL
MEET PRESIDENT TRUMP FOR THE
FIRST TIME WHEN HE VISITS THE
WHITE HOUSE TOMORROW.
AND THE TOPICS OF TRADE,
IMMIGRATION, AND NATIONAL
SECURITY WILL LIKELY TOP THEIR
AGENDA.
FOR A PREVIEW OF THE TRUDEAU-
TRUMP MEETING, YESTERDAY I SPOKE
WITH "NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER
IAN AUSTEN, WHO REPORTS FROM THE
CANADIAN CAPITAL OF OTTAWA.
WE KIND OF HAVE AN IDEA OF
WHAT'S GOING TO BE ON THE PLATE,
BUT HOW IS THE CANADIAN
GOVERNMENT PREPARING THE PRIME
MINISTER FOR THIS MEETING?
>> WELL, THEY STARTED PREPARING
FOR THE NEW ADMINISTRATION
VIRTUALLY RIGHT AFTER ELECTION
DAY.
I MEAN, TRUDEAU STARTED SENDING
DOWN HIS MOST SENIOR AIDES TO
WASHINGTON, ONE OF WHOM WAS HIS
COLLEGE ROOMMATE, TO START
MAKING CONNECTIONS WITH THE
MOST SENIOR PEOPLE IN THE NEW
ADMINISTRATION.
YOU KNOW, THE TWO MEN COULDN'T
BE MORE UNALIKE IN MANY
RESPECTS.
TRUDEAU CONSTANTLY DESCRIBES
HIMSELF AS BEING A FEMINIST.
HE'S A CHAMPION OF OPEN
IMMIGRATION.
HIS FIRST MOVE WAS TO BRING MORE
SYRIAN REFUGEES INTO CANADA.
BUT THEY'VE DECIDE THAT THEY'VE
GOT TO MAKE NICE WITH THIS
ADMINISTRATION BECAUSE THERE'S
JUST-- JUST TOO MUCH AT STAKE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, I
REMEMBER THE TWEET THAT I'M
FINDING HERE:
THAT WAS IN RESPONSE TO THE
EXECUTIVE ORDER ON IMMIGRATION
THAT TRUMP HAD PUT OUT.
>> YES.
BUT, AGAIN, ALL THOSE RESPONSES
HAVE BEEN VERY CAREFUL NOT TO
CRITICIZE TRUMP.
TRUDEAU WILL STATE WHAT CANADA'S
VALUES ARE, BUT HE WON'T BE
DRAWN OUT AS NEWS CONFERENCES.
HE JUST DID A SORT OF NATIONWIDE
TOUR WHERE HE'S DOING TOWN
HALLS.
IT'S JUST WRAPPING UP IN THE
ARCTIC.
HE'S NEVER DRAWN OUT WHEN PEOPLE
ASK HIM QUESTIONS ABOUT TRUMP.
THEY'VE DECIDED, I THINK, THAT
THEY'RE GOING TO TRY AND MAKE
NICE.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO POKE
MR. TRUMP IN THE EYE, BUT IF
MR. TRUMP PUNCHES CANADA,
THEY'RE GOING TO PUNCH BACK.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW,
SPEAKING OF PUNCHING, THE BIG
ISSUE RIGHT IN THE MIDDLE IS
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S INTEREST IN
RENEGOTIATE, NAFTA.
CANADA IS WHAT $670 BILLION
TRADING PARTNER.
HOW DOES CANADA WALK INTO THIS
SITUATION AND TRY TO FIGURE OUT,
PERHAPS, IF THERE IS A WAY TO
NEGOTIATE A BETTER DEAL?
>> CANADA'S GOT ITS OWN
COMPLAINTS ABOUT NAFTA.
SO TRUDEAU'S RESPONSE HAS BEEN
THAT THEY WELCOME THE
OPPORTUNITY TO RENEGOTIATE IT.
YOU KNOW, WE'LL HAVE TO SEE WHAT
FORM IT TAKES.
NAFTA HAS, BY SOME COUNTS, BEEN
ALREADY HAD 11 MAJOR CHANGES
MADE TO IT OVER THE COURSE OF
ITS HISTORY.
SO THIS ISN'T PARTICULARLY NEW.
THE ONE TRICKY ISSUE TRUDEAU IS
GOING TO FACE IS IF TRUMP'S CALL
ABOUT NAFTA IS MOSTLY ONE
DIRECTED AT MEXICO, AND THE
SIGNALS PUT OUT THAT THEY'LL
LEAVE CANADA ALONE, DO THEY SELL
MEXICO DOWN THE RIVER?
YOU KNOW, THEY'LL BE IN A VERY,
VERY TIGHT SPOT THERE, BECAUSE
TRADE WITH THE UNITED STATES IS
A FUNDAMENTAL ASPECT OF CANADA'S
ECONOMY.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE
PRESSURE BEING PUT ON PRIME
MINISTER TRUDEAU FROM DIFFERENT
WINGS OF HIS PARTY TO PERHAPS
STAND UP TO TRUMP FOR CANADIAN
VALUES THAT MIGHT BE DIFFERENT
THAN DONALD TRUMP'S VISION OF
THE WORLD, AND AT THE SAME TIME,
TO MAKE NICE AND MAKE SURE THAT
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT
RELATIONSHIP THAT NEEDS TO GET
ALONG AND DON'T POKE THE BEAR?
>> YEAH, I THINK-- WELL, I MEAN,
IT'S BEEN VERY INTERESTING THAT
THE CANADIAN PARLIAMENTARY
SYSTEM, OF COURSE, MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT ARE OSTENSIBLY
INDEPENDENT, BUT THERE'S BEEN
VERY TIGHT DISCIPLINE WITHIN
LIBERAL RANKS.
THERE HAVEN'T BEEN ANY
BACK-BENCH LIBERAL MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT DENOUNCING TRUMP ON
TWITTER OR OTHER SOCIAL MEDIA
PLATFORMS.
THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT, OF
COURSE, HAS BEEN.
THE LEADER OF THE NEW DEMOCRATIC
PARTY REPEATEDLY HAS CALLED
TRUMP A FASCIST.
SO EXTERNALLY AT LEAST, THE
PARTY'S IN SOLIDARITY, BUT THERE
ARE A LOT OF CANADIANS WHO WANT
TO SEE TRUDEAU, YOU KNOW, STAND
UP AND CHALLENGE TRUMP ON
ISSUES.
THE GOVERNMENT'S REJECTED
THAT.
I THINK THOSE PEOPLE ARE--
THEY'RE JUST GOING TO BE
DISAPPOINTED.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, IAN
AUSTEN OF THE "NEW YORK TIMES"
JOINING US FROM OTTAWA TONIGHT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> EXCELLENT, THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: CO-HOUSING IS
THE NAME FOR A COMMUNITY OF
PRIVATE HOMES CLUSTERED AROUND
SHARED SPACE, COMMUNITY
ACTIVITIES, AND COMMON IDEALS.
CO-HOUSING ALSO OFFERS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS OF
DIFFERENT GENERATIONS TO LIVE
TOGETHER.
THE CONCEPT IS GAINING A GREATER
FOOTHOLD IN THE UNITED STATES,
BUT WAS PIONEERED IN DENMARK.
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S" SASKIA DE
MELKER WENT THERE TO SEE HOW IT
WORKS.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE REGULAR
DINNER SCENE AT SAETTEDAMMEN, A
CO-HOUSING COMMUNITY 45 MINUTES
OUTSIDE DENMARK'S CAPITAL OF
COPENHAGEN.
STIG BRINCK, AN ARCHITECT, AND
HIS WIFE, AN ARTIST, AND THE
TEENAGE DAUGHTERS THEY'VE RAISED
HERE, ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR
TONIGHT'S MEAL, FOR THEMSELVES
AND 20 NEIGHBORS IN THE COMMON
HOUSE.
>> WE EAT TOGETHER FOUR TIMES A
WEEK, FOR THOSE WHO WANT TO
PARTICIPATE.
>> Reporter: WHAT'S IT LIKE
COOKING FOR 25 PEOPLE?
HOW DO YOU DO THAT?
>> FIRST OF ALL, WE HAVE A
KITCHEN THAT'S CAPABLE FOR IT.
SO WE HAVE THE TOOLS TO DO IT.
THAT'S VERY IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: COMMUNAL MEALS ARE
A STAPLE AT SAETTEDAMMEN, WHERE
71 PEOPLE LIVE IN 28 HOUSES
CLUSTERED AROUND SHARED
RECREATIONAL AND OUTDOOR SPACES,
WALKWAYS, GARDENS, AND PARKING,
AND A COMMON HOUSE.
RESIDENTS ARE EXPECTED TO CLEAN
SHARED AREAS AND TAKE TURNS
TENDING THE GROUNDS.
EVERYONE SHARES RESOURCES LIKE
LAUNDRY FACILITIES, OUTDOOR
TOOLS, AND PLAY EQUIPMENT.
SMALL GROUPS OF FAMILIES ROTATE
LEADING MONTHLY COMMUNITY
MEETINGS.
>> YOU LIVE IN KIND OF A SMALL,
SMALL VILLAGE.
YOU KNOW EVERYBODY AROUND YOU,
AND YOU SHARE AS MUCH AS
POSSIBLE.
SO YOU ARE VERY CLOSE NEIGHBORS,
AND YOU ARE KIND OF DEPENDING ON
EACH OTHER, BUT YOU'RE NOT
OBLIGATED TO ANY STRICT RULES.
>> Reporter: THE SAETTEDAMMEN
COMMUNITY IS MADE UP OF A RANGE
OF SINGLES, COUPLES, RETIREES,
AND FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN.
EVERY FAMILY HAS PRIVACY IN A
HOME WITH ITS OWN BEDROOMS,
BATHS, AND KITCHEN.
THE LAND IS COOPERATIVELY OWNED,
BUT RESIDENTS OWN THEIR HOMES--
A STRUCTURE SIMILAR TO A
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION IN THE
U.S.
THE COST OF HOMES HERE IS
COMPARABLE TO OTHER HOMES IN THE
AREA, BUT AN AVERAGE SIZED
HOUSEHOLD PAYS ABOUT $3,500
DOLLARS A YEAR FOR COMMUNAL
RESOURCES.
SAETTEDAMMEN STARTED 46 YEARS
AGO AND IS RECOGNIZED AS THE
FIRST COHOUSING COMMUNITY IN THE
WORLD.
BRITTA BJERRE AND HER HUSBAND,
ARNE, WERE AMONG THE FIRST
FAMILIES TO MOVE IN.
>> WE DIDN'T WANT OUR FAMILY TO
SPEND OUR LIVES IN AN INSULAR
WAY IN A HOUSE ON A SUBURBAN
STREET SOMEWHERE.
AND ONE DAY WE SAW A NEWSPAPER
AD SAYING THAT SOME PEOPLE HAD
THEIR EYES ON A PLOT OF LAND,
AND THEY WERE LOOKING FOR
TWENTY-FIVE TO THIRTY FAMILIES
TO BUY IT AND BUILD HOUSES AS
WELL AS A COMMUNAL HOUSE.
>> Reporter: LISA BERKMAN, A
PROFESSOR OF PUBLIC POLICY AND
EPIDEMIOLOGY AT HARVARD
UNIVERSITY SAYS THAT COHOUSING
HARKENS BACK TO THE KINDS OF
COMMUNITIES THAT USED TO
NATURALLY DOMINATE OUR
SOCIETIES.
>> YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU THINK
ABOUT THE APARTMENT BUILDINGS
THAT WERE DESIGNED AT THE TURN
OF THE CENTURY, THEY WERE
DESIGNED AS TWO-FAMILY HOUSES OR
THREE-FAMILY HOUSES, EACH ON A
FLOOR.
AND THOSE ENABLED MULTI-
GENERATION HOUSEHOLDS TO LIVE
TOGETHER AND STILL HAVE THEIR
OWN HOUSING.
>> Reporter: BERKMAN SAYS THAT
COHOUSING CAN REDUCE SOCIAL
ISOLATION AND THE DETRIMENTAL
HEALTH EFFECTS ASSOCIATED WITH
IT.
>> SOCIAL ISOLATION RELATES TO
THE NUMBER OF TIES AND THE
QUALITY OF RELATIONSHIPS THAT
YOU HAVE: RELIGIOUS TIES,
COMMUNITY TIES, WORK TIES.
PEOPLE WHO ARE VERY ISOLATED,
WHO ARE DISCONNECTED, HAVE A
MORTALITY RATE THAT'S ABOUT
THREE TIMES AS HIGH THAT IS,
THEY'RE ABOUT THREE TIMES AS
LIKELY TO DIE OVER MAYBE A
DECADE, AS PEOPLE WHO HAVE MANY,
MANY MORE TIES.
>> Reporter: 70-YEAR-OLD JYTTE
HELLE HAS LIVED IN SAETTEDAMMEN
FOR 30 YEARS.
>> IT'S IMPORTANT TO ME TO BE
WITH A MIXED GROUP, NOT ONLY
WITH OTHER OLDER PEOPLE, BECAUSE
THEN WE WOULD JUST TALK ABOUT
OUR DISEASES AND ACHES AND
PAINS.
OLDER PEOPLE CAN'T GIVE THE SAME
ENERGY AS YOUNGER PEOPLE CAN.
>> SO HAVING NEIGHBORS AND
KNOWING THEIR KIDS, I THINK
THAT'S JUST LIKE, IT'S A BENEFIT
OF HAVING A BIG FAMILY.
>> Reporter: IS THIS REPLACING
THE IDEA OF THE EXTENDED FAMILY?
>> INDEED IT IS.
I SEE IT VERY MUCH AS THE
EXTENDED FAMILY.
>> IT'S LIKE NICE TO HAVE A
FRIEND NEARBY ALWAYS THAT YOU
CAN TALK TO.
>> Reporter: 14-YEAR OLD ELLA
POULSEN HAS LIVED IN
SAETTEDAMMEN HER WHOLE LIFE.
>> IT'S KIND OF LIKE EVERYONE'S
A PARENT, AND EVERYBODY WILL
TAKE CARE OF THE KID IF THERE'S
SOMETHING WRONG AND THE PARENTS
AREN'T THERE.
I THINK IT'S JUST VERY SAFE.
>> Reporter: IT'S ESTIMATED THAT
AT LEAST 1% OF THE DANISH
POPULATION LIVES IN COHOUSING
ARRANGEMENTS.
IN THE UNITED STATES, THE
COHOUSING ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA
ESTIMATES THERE ARE ABOUT 150
COMMUNITIES.
ROCKY HILL COHOUSING IN
NORTHAMPTON, MASSACHUSETTS WAS
ESTABLISHED 12 YEARS AGO.
IT HAS 28 HOUSEHOLDS WITH
RESIDENTS RANGING FROM AGE 2 TO
80.
WITH A SIMILAR FINANCIAL MODEL
TO SAETTEDAMMEN, ROCKY HILL HAS
A VARIETY OF COMMON SPACES,
RESOURCES, ACTIVITIES, AND
SHARED CHORES.
>> I LOVE KNOWING THAT
SOMEBODY'S OUT THERE PLOWING THE
PATH ON A SNOWY MORNING.
THAT'S LOVELY, KNOWING THAT
THERE ARE MIXED AGES OF PEOPLE
WHO CAN HELP WITH KEEPING THE
PLACE UP, AND WE HAVE OUR JOBS
DIVIDED.
>> Reporter: CAROL RINEHART IS
72-YEARS-OLD AND JUST RETIRED
FROM HER JOB AS A HOSPICE
COORDINATOR.
SHE'S LIVED AT ROCKY HILL SINCE
ITS FORMATION.
>> YOU DON'T GET UP SOME DAY IN
THE MORNING AND SAY, "YOU KNOW,
I THINK THIS IS THE DAY I'M
GOING TO HAVE A COMMUNITY."
YOU KNOW, YOU BUILD A COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: THE NUMBER OF
AMERICANS 65 AND OLDER IS
EXPECTED TO NEARLY DOUBLE BY
2050.
ACCORDING TO THE PEW RESEARCH
CENTER, 61% SAY THEY WOULD
PREFER TO STAY IN THEIR HOMES
EVEN WHEN THEY CAN NO LONGER
TAKE CARE OF THEMSELVES.
THAT'S COMPARED TO 17% WHO WOULD
OPT FOR AN ASSISTED LIVING
FACILITY.
JUST 8% WOULD PREFER TO MOVE IN
WITH A FAMILY MEMBER.
HARVARD PROFESSOR LISA BERKMAN
SAYS COHOUSING ALLOWS PEOPLE TO
AGE IN THEIR HOMES.
>> WITH THE AGING OF THE
POPULATION AND THE INCREASING
FRAILTY THAT PEOPLE WILL
EXPERIENCE AS THEY AGE, AT SOME
POINT EVERYBODY NEEDS A LITTLE
HELP.
AMERICANS ARE PARTICULARLY
VULNERABLE TO SOCIAL ISOLATION
IN PART BECAUSE WE VALUE
INDEPENDENCE SO MUCH, AND
BECAUSE WE'RE SO MOBILE.
AND WE LIVE IN A VERY, VERY BIG
COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: BERKMAN SAYS THAT
WHILE OLDER AMERICANS ARE
ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE TO SOCIAL
ISOLATION, YOUNG FAMILIES OFTEN
STRUGGLE TO MAINTAIN SOCIAL
NETWORKS AS THEY JUGGLE WORK AND
FAMILY.
COLLEGE PROFESSOR GARY FELDER
LIVES AT THE ROCKY HILL
COHOUSING COMMUNITY WITH HIS
WIFE AND THEIR TWO YOUNG
CHILDREN.
HE SAYS THEIR SOCIAL LIFE IS
BUILT IN, UNLIKE OTHER FAMILIES
WHO DON'T LIVE IN A COHOUSING
ARRANGEMENT.
>> YOU'VE GOT TO ARRANGE
BABYSITTING, YOU NEED TO FIGURE
OUT THE TIMING, AND THEN YOU'VE
GOT TO RUSH BACK AND SO ON.
AND THAT WAS JUST NEVER A BIG
DEAL FOR US.
WE WOULD PUT OUR KIDS DOWN, WE
WOULD THROW IN A BABY MONITOR
AND WE WOULD GO SPEND AN EVENING
WITH OUR FRIENDS.
EVERY WEEK.
>> Reporter: CAUSE YOU'RE RIGHT
NEXT DOOR, TO THE COMMON HOUSE?
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
AND IF ONE OF OUR KIDS WOKE UP,
TWO MINUTES LATER WE WERE IN THE
BEDROOM.
>> Reporter: FELDER ADMITS THAT
THIS LIFESTYLE ISN'T FOR
EVERYONE, AND ABOUT ONE FAMILY A
YEAR DECIDES TO LEAVE.
>> THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE IS THAT
YOU'RE MAKING DECISIONS WITH 27
OTHER HOUSEHOLDS.
THAT IS THE DEFINITION OF HELL
FOR SOME PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: BUT FELDER SAYS
THAT FOR HIS FAMILY THE BENEFITS
THEY GET FROM AN
INTERGENERATIONAL COMMUNITY
OUTWEIGH THE DIFFICULTIES.
>> THE OTHER THING WHICH OUR
KIDS GET, WHICH IS EVEN MORE
RARE IN THIS SOCIETY, IS THEY
HAVE REGULAR INTERACTIONS WITH
ELDERS, WITH SENIORS.
THEY'RE VERY AWARE OF THE WHOLE
PROCESS OF PEOPLE GETTING OLDER
AND RETIRING AND HAVING PHYSICAL
PROBLEMS AND DYING.
>> Reporter: ROCKY HILL
RESIDENTS ARE COMING UP WITH NEW
GUIDELINES TO HELP AGING
COMMUNITY MEMBERS, INCLUDING
RIDE SHARING AND CONNECTING
RESIDENTS WITH FINANCIAL AND
MEDICAL SERVICES.
>> COULD WE EVEN MAKE A SPACE
HERE IN THE COMMON HOUSE FOR
SOMEBODY WHO LIVES AND IS A
LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE AND
TAKING CARE OF SEVERAL DIFFERENT
FAMILIES WHO MAY BE IN THAT AREA
OF NEED.
>> Reporter: AT THE SAETTEDAMMEN
COMMUNITY IN DENMARK,
MAINTAINING AN INTERGENERATIONAL
COMMUNITY IS GETTING HARDER.
MORE THAN HALF OF THE RESIDENTS
ARE NOW OVER 65.
THE COMMUNITY IS ENCOURAGING
YOUNGER FAMILIES TO MOVE IN WHEN
HOMES BECOME AVAILABLE.
MANY LONG TIME RESIDENTS, LIKE
JYTTE HELLE, DON'T WANT TO LEAVE
THEIR SOCIAL SUPPORT NETWORK.
>> WE'VE BEEN A PART OF CREATING
THIS, AND WANT TO FEEL THE
BENEFITS THAT COME WITH GETTING
OLD IN A COHOUSING COMMUNITY
LIKE THIS.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK THERE
IS SOMETHING ABOUT THIS
COMMUNITY, DOES IT KEEP YOU
YOUNGER?
>> YES.
DEFINITELY.
I'M CONVINCED THAT IF I LIVED
EXCLUSIVELY WITH ELDERLY PEOPLE,
I WOULD DEGENERATE.
SO THE FACT THAT I'M LIVING WITH
YOUNGER PEOPLE IS A GIFT ON A
DAILY BASIS.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A UNITED NATIONS
INQUIRY HAS CONCLUDED THAT AT
LEAST 18 CIVILIANS WERE
INADVERTENTLY KILLED DURING
AMERICAN-LED AIR STRIKES
TARGETING TALIBAN FIGHTERS IN
AFGHANISTAN THREE DAYS AGO.
THE AIRSTRIKE OCCURRED IN
SOUTHERN HELMAND PROVINCE IN A
JOINT OPERATION WITH AFGHAN
FORCES.
AN AFGHAN OFFICIAL SAID THE
CIVILIANS KILLED-- MOSTLY WOMEN
AND CHILDREN-- WERE MEMBERS OF
TWO FAMILIES.
THE U.S. MILITARY SAYS IT IS
STILL INDEPENDENTLY
INVESTIGATING THE ALLEGATIONS.
IRAQ'S GOVERNMENT IS PROMISING A
FULL INVESTIGATION OF DEADLY
CLASHES OVER ELECTION REFORM.
A POLICE OFFICER AND AT LEAST
FIVE FOLLOWERS OF RADICAL SHIITE
CLERIC MOQTADA AL-SADR WERE
KILLED DURING CLASHES YESTERDAY.
WHEN ANTI-GOVERNMENT PROTESTERS
TRIED TO CROSS A BRIDGE LEADING
TO THE FORTIFIED GREEN ZONE,
WHERE MANY GOVERNMENT OFFICES
AND EMBASSIES ARE LOCATED.
IRAQI SECURITY FORCES FIRED
BULLETS AND TEAR GAS TO DISPERSE
THE CROWDS.
ALMOST 200 OTHER PEOPLE WERE
INJURED.
TODAY, SADR PROMISED WHAT HE
CALLED "PEACEFUL RETALIATION."
THE PROTESTERS WANT CHANGES TO A
COMMISSION OVERSEEING THIS
YEAR'S LOCAL ELECTIONS THAT SADR
CLAIMS FAVORS HIS SHIITE RIVAL,
FORMER IRAQI PRIME MINISTER
NOURI AL-MALIKI.
IN RURAL AUSTRALIA, MORE THAN
TWO THOUSAND FIREFIGHTERS ARE
BATTLING 86 WILDFIRES AND BRUSH
FIRES.
TEMPERATURES OVER 100 DEGREES
COMBINED WITH HIGH WINDS AND
LITTLE RAIN HAVE CREATED"
CATASTROPHIC" FIRE CONDITIONS
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
ABOUT 200 MILES NORTHWEST OF
SYDNEY.
THERE ARE REPORTS OF DESTROYED
HOMES AND BUILDINGS, BUT NO
FATALITIES.
IN GREECE, MORE THAN 70,000
PEOPLE BEGAN RETURNING TO THEIR
HOMES TODAY IN THE COUNTRY'S
SECOND-LARGEST CITY, AFTER ARMY
TECHNICIANS DEFUSED AND REMOVED
AN UNEXPLODED BOMB FROM WORLD
WAR TWO.
THE FIVE-FOOT LONG, 275-POUND
BOMB WAS DISCOVERED A WEEK AGO
IN THESSALONIKI DURING AN
EXCAVATION AT A GAS STATION.
AN AMERICAN PLANE DROPPED IT IN
1944, WHEN GERMAN FORCES
OCCUPIED THE CITY.
FINALLY, ONLY HOURS BEFORE THIS
EVENING'S GRAMMY AWARDS,
SEVEN-TIME GRAMMY WINNER AL
JARREAU DIED.
IN A CAREER SPANNING HALF A
CENTURY AND MORE THAN 20 ALBUMS,
THE SINGER WON GRAMMYS FOR JAZZ,
R&B, AND POP.
HIS BIGGEST HIT WAS "WE'RE IN
THIS LOVE TOGETHER," FROM 1981.
HIS FAMILY SAID JARREAU DIED IN
A LOS ANGELES HOSPITAL TODAY,
BUT GAVE NO CAUSE OF DEATH.
AL JARREAU WAS 76.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
GOOD NIGHT.